We seek to spread the values of freedom and democracy that are at the heart of our transatlantic partnership so that past labels of East and West no longer have political meaning
We welcome the achievements of the reforms now under way in most countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the determination of their democratic governments to pursue their reform policies further. But we are also aware of the difficulties they are facing in this effort. We reaffirm our commitment to assist them, and support the initiatives undertaken in the Group of 24 and through other multilateral channels, in surmounting the problems they encounter in their transition to market-oriented economies.
We look to the eventual spread of democratic freedoms to the people of Albania and hope that attempts at reform in this country will bear fruit.
The building of durable democratic institutions and the pursuit of effective political and economic reforms in our North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC) partner countries remain of utmost importance for European stability. In this connection, we welcome the results of the Russian referendum in April which have clearly indicated the desire of the Russian people to move ahead with reform and not to return to discredited formulas of the past.Cooperation with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and Central Asia, particularly in the framework of NACC, is a key element of the Alliance's strategy for protecting peace and promoting progress through constructive joint effort. Development of cooperation in peacekeeping is substantively enhancing our cooperative activities and reflects our shared commitment to peace.Concrete cooperation among our countries is developing further through the implementation of the 1993 Work Plan. 
Pursuant to article 18 of the PSC Protocol, the PSC had its third engagement with the Pan African Parliament (PAP) during its 1160th meeting held on 30 June 2023. This follows the first meeting (148th held on 22 August 2008) and the second meeting (344th meeting held on 27 November 2012). The PSC encouraged the PAP to continue championing African interests and African common positions, including advocating for the lifting of sanctions and unilateral coercive measures imposed against African Union Member States, and consider developing close working relations with similar organisations from other Continents or regions, to galvanise support for African interests, and to enhance collaboration and cooperation in addressing issues relating to the promotion of peace, security, democracy and good governance in the Continent. The PSC, mindful of each other’s respective mandate, underscored the need for the two Organs to continue exploring practical means and ways of further enhancing their collaboration and cooperation in the promotion of peace, security and stability in the continent, as well as African Common Positions of peace and security matter, particularly in the international fora.
Strengthening relations with partners remains an important goal for NATO. We welcome the interest by contact countries in NATO’s activities. We are determined to make the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council and Partnership for Peace more effective value-based frameworks for enhancing international stability, extending interoperability and cooperation between Allies and partners, and promoting democratic values and reforms. We welcome the response by many countries to the new opportunities for closer cooperation with NATO through our Mediterranean Dialogue and Istanbul Cooperation Initiative, and underline the importance of their ongoing activities. We intend to ensure that our various partnership instruments continue to help us to pursue the objectives of partnership and are pleased that partners are increasingly using these tools. We welcome the contributions to our operations by our partner and contact countries as well as by other nations.
NATO’s aim is to assist in the emergence of a secure and stable Afghanistan, with a broad-based, gender sensitive, multi-ethnic and fully representative government, integrated into the international community and cooperating with its neighbours.
We celebrate the success of NATO’s Open Door policy, and reaffirm today that our seven new members will not be the last. The door to membership remains open. We welcome the progress made by Albania, Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in implementing their Annual National Programmes under the Membership Action Plan, and encourage them to continue pursuing the reforms necessary to progress towards NATO membership. We also commend their contribution to regional stability and cooperation. We want all three countries to succeed and will continue to assist them in their reform efforts.
We have today also decided to offer cooperation to the broader Middle East region by launching our 'Istanbul Cooperation Initiative'. This initiative is offered by NATO to interested countries in the region, starting with the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council, to foster mutually beneficial bilateral relationships and thus enhance security and stability. The initiative focuses on practical cooperation where NATO can add value, notably in the defence and security fields.
We encourage Ukraine to accelerate the implementation of the objectives outlined in the NATO-Ukraine Action Plan, particularly regarding the conduct of free and fair elections, the guaranteeing of media freedoms, and implementation of the results of the Defence Review
Besides political brokerage, the operations of the Presence include assistance with and the monitoring of elections, assistance in the Constitution drafting process, assistance with the creation of a civil registry, donor co-ordination, NGO development, parliamentary observation, and (through its Legal Counsellor’s Office) advancement of the rule of law and respect for human rights. A recent initiative was the formation of a “Friends of Albania” group comprising 23 countries and eight international organizations, co-chaired by OSCE and EU. At the local level the Chairmanship is ensured by the Head of Presence. It is hoped that through its collective efforts the group will act as a stimulus and lend direction and focus to ideas and projects.
Its rapid response capabilities and adaptability mean that it can provide practical assistance to still fragile emerging democracies throughout the OSCE area in their efforts to build sustainable democratic systems. The challenges remain enormous, however, and the risks to the stability of the countries in question are very real. The ODIHR, supported by the OSCE’s participating States and other OSCE institutions, intends to further pursue activities designed to enhance the stability of the countries in transition, thereby – it hopes – contributing to conflict prevention, stability and security throughout the OSCE area
As the primary institution within the OSCE focusing on the human dimension of security, the Warsaw-based Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) provides support, assistance and expertise to governments and civil society in OSCE participating States to promote democracy, the rule of law, human rights, tolerance and nondiscrimination and respect for the rights of Roma and Sinti.
The OSCE broadened its outreach in 2004. In September, we sent an Election Support Team to Afghanistan to assist the Afghan authorities in that country’s major step towards a representative and pluralistic democracy. Because this was the first time the OSCE launched such an operation on the territory of one of its Partners for Co-operation, it receives special attention in this report. We continued our close co-operation with Mediterranean and Asian Partners for Co-operation and welcomed Mongolia as the newest Partner. We also strengthened co-operation with other regional and sub-regional organizations, such as the Shanghai Co-operation Organization or the Organization of the Islamic Conference. It is encouraging to see the level of interest that people outside of the OSCE area have for our Organization. 
The world’s diversity of cultures and civilizations is a universal human value. In an era of rapid developme nt of information technologies and communications it should promote mutual interest, tolerance, freedom from extremes in approaches and assessments and development of a dialogue. The right of every nation to its own way of development should be fully guaranteed.
In these circumstances, the member states confirm their commitment to further strengthening the legal framework of international relations in accordance with the generally recognized principles and norms of international law, primarily those enshrined in the United Nations Charter. They support the respect for the individual choice by the peoples of all countries of the ways of their political and socio-economic development. They emphasize that the principles of mutual respect for sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity, equality, mutual benefit and non-interference in internal affairs, non-use of force or threat of force form the basis for sustainable development of international relations.
The member states support the elaboration of universal rules, principles and standards of responsible behavior by states in the information space, and consider “Rules of conduct in the field of international information security” distributed on behalf of the member states as an official UN document, an important step in this direction.
They note that, corruption, as a threat to national and regional security, in all its forms and manifestations leads to less effective public administration, adversely affects investment appeal and hampers socioeconomic progress. In this regard, they expressed their intention to develop comprehensive international cooperation in the sphere of anti-corruption activities, including through the sharing of experience and information, as well as practical measures of cooperation in this area between competent authorities.
The member states encourage practical cooperation on the basis of the SCO Intergovernmental Agreement on Culture of 2007. They will continue promoting cultural ties in the SCO, the deepening of mutual understanding between peoples, respect for each other’s cultural traditions and customs, the preservation and encouragement of cultural diversity, the holding of international exhibitions, festivals and contests, the participation of group and individual performers in different SCO events, the discovery of historical documents in archives and libraries, the expansion of cultural exchange and cooperation, and the study and preservation of the region’s heritage, including that of the Great Silk Road
The potential of digital technology to transform social, cultural and economic life has not been fully realized. Member States will continue efforts to ensure that the benefits of digital transformation are accessible and affordable for the full realization of human potential and will focus on people-centric development. The development and implementation of practical digital solutions, effective digital literacy and skills development measures for all citizens, play a decisive role in meeting their social and economic and achieve inclusive economic development.
The member states emphasize that the Organization should remain focused on strengthen ed coordination of joint measures to recover from the world financial and economic crisis and reduce its negative impacts. In order to overcome the crisis, con sistent efforts should be made to modernize national economies and channel them into the path of innovati ons . A ll countries concerned should be equally involved in the international decision making process and global and regional cooperation should be stre ngthened towards th e se ends.
The Shanghai Cooperation Organization is open for constructive dialogue with all international and regional organizations that share the SCO goals and principles and are guided in their activities by international law and the UN Charter. Based on this, the SCO is willing to review potential cooperation with other international organizations in order to ensure st able, secure and harmonious development of the region with due regard to and fullest consideration of the interests of the SCO member countries.
We provide proactive, visionary leadership for promoting and reinforcing the spirit and commitment to regional integration, emphasising transparency, accountability and operational excellence within all organs and institutions in the Community. We rely on research for evidence-based decision-making at all levels, with a systematic approach to monitoring and measuring policy outcomes and impacts.
Our outreach to the International Community is an important element as we continue our efforts to win friends and influence outcomes in global fora. There is no doubt that our strong record of support for multilateralism, and the principles enshrined in the UN Charter, were significant factors in the successful bid of St. Vincent and the Grenadines for the prestigious position of a seat on the UN Security Council. It is a significant accomplishment for the Government and people of St. Vincent and Grenadines, and the Region, as the country became the smallest state ever to gain a seat on the Security Council.
These consultations are to inform the revision and completion of the first-of-its-kind Strategy for the Region by October 2023. The Strategy’s goal is to “accelerate the effective implementation of key priority actions through a regional coordinated approach to achieve gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls”. It provides a roadmap for Member States to mainstream gender and is aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Member States were encouraged to align their policies and action plans with the CRGES. These consultations fall under the violence-prevention pillar of the Strategy, which is being funded both by UN Women and UNDP under the Regional Spotlight Initiative Caribbean Programme.