The Alliance remains essential and has a vital role to play. Mindful that we face many challenges ahead which transcend the resources of either Europe or America alone, we will focus our major long-term efforts on:sustaining the enduring principles and benefits of our transatlantic partnership, including those that flow from our collective defence, while our Alliance adapts to new circumstances and new opportunities;continuing to provide the indispensable basis for the security of our member states, and thereby the foundation of an environment of stability and co-operation in which democracies can flourish;expanding our active search for a co-operative approach to security;helping to construct a new Europe in which all peoples will be able to share in the benefits of a more secure and prosperous peace;ensuring that the Allies can successfully meet new challenges to security from any quarter.
Achieving lasting peace and security in Africa requires a holistic approach that addresses the root causes of conflict, promotes good governance, and upholds constitutionalism and the rule of law. It is essential to prioritize the needs and aspirations of our people and adopt proactive preventive diplomacy—ensuring that African solutions address African challenges. Enhanced vigilance through a strengthened Continental Early Warning System is critical for timely responses to emerging threats and instability, reinforcing the interconnectedness of peace and security with broader societal, economic, and political dynamics.
Effective support for complex political transition equates to protecting development. AFSIT represents an opportunity to uphold and safeguard development as a primary objective during transitions. This requires a clear recognition of the need to prioritise the restoration, and strengthening, of accountable and responsive governance as a key component of the transition agenda. Council AFSIT is positioned as a continental tool to support the implementation of comprehensive governance reform in critical areas such as constitutional review, justice sector reform, support to electoral processes, and the overall quest for rebuilding vertical and horizontal trust between the state and citizens and amongst communities. AFSIT also seeks to advance women and youth participation in transition processes, primarily by increasing the quantity and quality of women and youth participation in dialogue and political decision-making processes
The normative framework of the African Union, in conjunction with the instrumental role played by the PSC, has produced commendable outcomes. The utilization of this framework has effectively contributed to the establishment of constitutional governance and the smooth transition of power in numerous member states. Furthermore, it is worth noting that African populations have exhibited increased vigilance in their pursuit of respect for constitutional and democratic principles, alongside a desire for enhanced engagement in political processes. Some member states have demonstrated commendable advancements in the establishment of robust institutions, the adoption of sound governance principles, the implementation of judicial reforms, and the pursuit of anti-corruption endeavours. However, it is important to acknowledge that Africa has faced particular challenges in recent times, specifically concerning the re-emergence of Unconstitutional Changes of Government (UCGs). The aforementioned actions pose a potential challenge to the democratic advancements achieved in recent decades and to the overall stability and development of the continent. These serve as a reminder of the imperative for the African Union to carefully reconsider and strengthen its normative frameworks, especially the implementation of existing frameworks, to tackle emerging threats effectively and take proactive measures to prevent them. While acknowledging the commendable efforts that some member states have made, it is important to note that challenges continue to persist in the areas of constitutionalism and the rule of law.
We, the Heads of State and Government of the member countries of the North Atlantic Alliance, have gathered in Washington to celebrate the 50th anniversary of NATO and to set forth our vision of the Alliance of the 21st century. The North Atlantic Alliance, founded on the principles of democracy, individual liberty and the rule of law, remains the basis of our collective defence; it embodies the transatlantic link that binds North America and Europe in a unique defence and security partnership.
We, the Heads of State and Government of the member countries of the North Atlantic Alliance, reaffirmed today the enduring value of the transatlantic link and of NATO as the basis for our collective defence and the essential forum for security consultation between Europe and North America. Our 26 nations are united in democracy, individual liberty and the rule of law, and faithful to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
We reaffirmed our determination to reinforce NATO's European pillar and remain committed to a balanced and dynamic transatlantic partnership. 
The Alliance will remain the foundation for the collective defence of its members and continue actively to play its important role in crisis management as set out in the Strategic Concept.
In their opening remarks, the Co-Chairs welcomed the participants to the Workshop and stated the aim of the Workshop, which was to provide an opportunity for the participants to exchange views on changes in security concepts and perceptions on the evolving security environment in the region and thereby contribute to confidence building.
The Workshop was reminded that false perceptions could lead to unnecessary arms build-up and even wars. ARF’s strategic objective should be to narrow the perception gaps among the ARF participants.
Rapid economic growth has brought benefits to many in the region, but significant challenges remain. Apart from evolving great-power relationships, these include: unresolved territorial disputes, rapidly expanding military budgets, nuclear and missile proliferation, the impact of transnational crime, natural disasters, human pandemics, energy and food security and the maintenance of economic growth through open and inclusive economic liberalisation. Such issues cannot be resolved by any one nation alone; they require properly coordinated regional responses driven by regional institutions which themselves encourage the culture, habits and practices of cooperation.
At the same time, attempts to unilaterally change the status quo in the East China Sea by force or coercion are unacceptable. Japan will continue to respond calmly and resolutely while strengthening coordination with the relevant countries, along with strengthening communication in order to make the East China Sea a “Sea of Peace, Cooperation and Friendship.” 124 Japan shares serious concerns with international community over the newly-enforced China’s Coast Guard Law, as it includes several articles that are problematic in terms of consistency with international law. For instance, the sea areas to which the Law is applied are not clear, nor are conditions where the use of force by the Coast Guard is permitted under the Law. It is unacceptable that the tensions in the East and South China Seas are raised by the Law.
At the high-level OSCE regional conference entitled “The role of digital technologies in reducing corruption risks”, held in October in Kazakhstan, Professor Paola Severino, Special Representative of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office on Combating Corruption, stated that, “[t]he added value of the Organization in the international fight against corruption lies first and foremost in the core mission of the OSCE – to promote and strengthen security. Even in the digital era, corruption remains one of the major challenges affecting the OSCE area, as well as a major threat to democracy, human rights, rule of law and, last but not least, economic development. 
Other developments also proved challenging. Trials of protesters following the 2010 presidential elections in Belarus raised alarm over the state of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the country, causing some participating States to launch the OSCE’s Moscow Mechanism. An ongoing financial crisis in the Eurozone, a political crisis in Albania, violence in northern Kosovo and disturbances in western Kazakhstan reminded us of the challenges that remain as we work toward the vision of a free, democratic, common and indivisible Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian security community. 
Reconfirm, recommit and commemorate Within the overarching strategic objective of organizing the follow-up process set forth in the Astana Commemorative Declaration, the Lithuanian Chairmanship worked to encourage openness and transparency; to build trust and confidence; to reduce tensions throughout the OSCE area; to build concretely upon the basic commitments of Helsinki, Paris, Istanbul and re-confirmed in Astana; and to uphold human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law. 
As Chair, we have worked hard to ensure respect for the commitments and accountability when they are breached. Over the course of this year, we have seen how violations of our commitments have continued to challenge the foundation on which the OSCE is built. By our consistent focus on our priorities, I am proud to have contributed to security in our region and to the work of coming Chairs.
Many challenges will confront us in the year ahead. However, united by our common values, keeping together in the spirit of solidarity and drawing strength from our diversity, we will not spare efforts to make the Organization stronger. 
The heads of state hold that the SCO joint efforts aimed at ensuring safety and enhancing the Organization’s capacity do not jeopardize the interests of other countries and should not be perceived as a n attempt of any block creation. They are fully consistent with the principle of the SCO openness and the spirit of broad international cooperation in confronting new challenges and threats
The member states reaffirm that the unilateral and unrestricted build-up of missile defence systems by one state or a group of states, without taking into account the interests of other countries, is detrimental to international and regional security and stability. They find it unacceptable to ensure one’s own security at the expense of others.
The member states favour the development of broad international cooperation to promote the recovery of the global economy, ensure economic and financial stability and support dynamic, well-balanced and inclusive growth in conditions of economic globalisation. They have reaffirmed their common understanding that world trade should be conducted on the principles of transparency and non-discrimination and rules that apply equally to all participants. In this context they noted the risks linked with the growing trend towards trade protectionism and the importance of countering all of its manifestations, in particular, removing existing trade barriers and preventing the emergence of new ones. The member states advocate the formation of an open global economy and the consolidation of the multilateral trade system.